# "Creative thinking" by Claude Shannon

## Background

On March 20, 1952 Claude Shannon gave a lecture titled "Creative Thinking". He presented his views on the process of thinking creatively. This article was likely not written by Shannon, but by someone else, and has been circulating from time to time. [^1]

## Speech Transcript

A very small percentage of the population produces the greatest proportion of important ideas. This is akin to an idea presented by an English mathematician, Turing, that the human brain is something like a piece of uranium. The human brain, if it is below the critical lap and you shoot one neutron into it, additional more would be produced by the impact. It leads to an extremely explosive of the issue, increase the size of the uranium. Turing says this is something like ideas in the human brain. There are some people if you shoot one idea into the brain, you will get a half an idea out. Other people are beyond this point at which they produce two ideas for each idea sent in. Those are the people beyond the knee of the curve. I don't want to sound egotistical here, I don't that I am beyond the knee of this curve and I don't know anyone who is. I do know some people that were. I think, for example, that anyone will agree that Issac Newton would be well on the top of this curve. When you think that at the age of 25 he had produced enough science, physics, and mathematics to make ten or twenty men famous - he produced binomial theorem, differential and integral calculus, laws of gravitation, laws of motion, decomposition of white light, and so on. Now, what is it that shoots one up to this part of the curve? What are the basic requirements? I think we could set down three things that are fairly necessary for scientific research or for any sort of inventing or mathematics or physics or anything along that line. I don't think a person can get along without any one of these three.

The first one is obvious - training and experience. You don't expect a lawyer, however bright he may be, to give you a new theory of physics these days or mathematics or engineering.

The second thing is a certain amount of intelligence or talent. In other words, you have to have an IQ that is fairly high to do good reserach work. I don't think that there is any good engineer or scientist that can get along on an IQ of 100, which is the average for human beings. In other words, he has to have an IQ higher than that. Everyone in this room is considerably above that. This, we might say, is a matter of environment; intelligence is a matter of heredity.

These two I don't think are sufficient. I think there is a third constituent here, a third component which is the one that makes an Einstein or an Issac Newton. For want of a better word, we will call it motivation. In other words, you have to have some kind of a drive, some kind of a desire to find out the answer, a desire to find out what makes things tick.If you don't have that, you may have all the training and intelligence in the world, you don't have questions and you won't just find answers. This is a hard thing to put your finger on. It is a matter of temperament probably; that is, a matter of probably early training, early childhood experiences, whether you will motivate in the direction of scientific research. I think that a superficial level, it is blended use of several things. This is not any attempt at a deep analysis at all, but my feeling is that a good scientist has a great deal of what we call curiosity. I won't go any deeper into it than that. He wants to know the answers. He is just curious how things tick and he want to know the answers to questions; and if he sees thinks, he wants to raise questions and he wants to know the answers to those.

## Footnotes

[^1]: The original text can be found in [Information Theory Society](https://www.itsoc.org/resources/miscellaneous/creative-thinking/view)
